revision: 1163204798
title: Christina Aguilera
url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christina_Aguilera


---

Christina María Aguilera ( AG-il-AIR-ə, Spanish: [kɾisˈtina maˈɾi.a aɣiˈleɾa]; born December 18, 1980) is an American singer, songwriter, actress, and television personality. Referred to as the "Voice of a Generation", she is noted for her four-octave vocal range and signature use of melisma. She is recognized as an influential figure in popular music, having been credited with paving the way for pop artists who incorporate often controversial themes such as feminism, sexuality, and LGBT culture into their music.
Aguilera rose to fame in 1999 with her self-titled debut album. Its singles "Genie in a Bottle", "What a Girl Wants" and "Come On Over Baby (All I Want Is You)" reached the top of the US Billboard Hot 100, and Aguilera won the Grammy Award for Best New Artist. She found continued success with Mi Reflejo (2001), Stripped (2002) and the critically acclaimed Back to Basics (2006). The latter two constituted a departure from her teen idol image, with Stripped becoming one of the best-selling albums of the 21st century. She also amassed numerous international hits, including her fourth Billboard Hot 100 number-one single "Lady Marmalade", as well as "Beautiful", "Dirrty", "Can't Hold Us Down", "Fighter", "Ain't No Other Man" and "Hurt". Throughout the 2010s, Aguilera featured on the successful singles "Feel This Moment", "Say Something", and "Moves like Jagger"; the latter reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100, making Aguilera the eighth artist to reach the top spot over three decades.
Aguilera was a cast member of the television show The All-New Mickey Mouse Club (1993–1994) as a child. She recorded "Reflection", the theme for the 1998 animated film Mulan, and later re-recorded the track for its 2020 live-action remake. For her contributions to the Walt Disney Company, Aguilera was awarded with a Disney Legends award. In 2010, she starred in Burlesque and contributed to its soundtrack.  Her subsequent ventures included a role in the series Nashville (2015), roles in the films The Emoji Movie (2017) and Zoe (2018), becoming an ambassador for the World Food Programme (WFP), performing a concert residency and serving as a coach on the reality competition show The Voice (2011–2016).
Aguilera is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, with estimated sales of over 100 million records sold worldwide. Considered a pop culture icon and a triple threat entertainer, she has been named one of the greatests vocalists of all time by publications such as Rolling Stone and Consequence of Sound. In 2009, Billboard named her the twentieth most successful artist of the 2000s, she and was ranked the eighth greatest woman in music by VH1. Aguilera is regarded as one of the most influential Latin artists in the entertainment industry. Her accolades include five Grammy Awards, two Latin Grammy Awards, six ALMA Awards, two MTV Video Music Awards (VMA), one Billboard Music Award, one Guinness World Record, and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.


== Early life ==
Christina María Aguilera was born on December 18, 1980, in New York City, New York, to Shelly Loraine (née Fidler) and Fausto Wagner Xavier Aguilera. Her father is an Ecuadorian emigrant from Guayaquil while her mother has German, Irish, Welsh, and Dutch ancestry. Fausto Aguilera was a United States Army sergeant, and Shelly Loraine was a violinist in the American Youth Symphony before becoming a Spanish translator. Due to Fausto's military service, the Aguilera family moved frequently, living in New Jersey and Texas. In 1983, they moved to Japan and lived in Sagamihara for at least two years. The family returned to the US and ultimately settled in Pennsylvania, where they welcomed her younger sister, Rachel, in 1986. Aguilera has spoken out about her father's physically and emotionally abusive behavior. She eventually used music to escape her turbulent household. In 1987, Shelly filed divorce to Fausto and moved with her children to her mother's home in Rochester, a suburb of Pittsburgh. She later married James Kearns with whom she had a son named Michael. In 2012, following decades of estrangement, Aguilera expressed interest in reconciling with her biological father.During childhood, Aguilera explored her grandmother's personal records—which featured mostly soul and blues singers—which increased her interest in music. She also began to practice singing and competing in talent contests. Followed numerous contests, she earned reputation in the neighborhood as the "little girl with a big voice" and received attention from local television and radio programs. In 1990, she performed the popular song "A Sunday Kind of Love" on the reality competition show Star Search, but was eliminated during the semi-final round. Aguilera eventually was invited to sing "The Star-Spangled Banner" before Pittsburgh Penguins hockey, Pittsburgh Steelers football, and Pittsburgh Pirates baseball games, as well during the 1992 Stanley Cup Finals. During her youth in Pittsburgh metropolitan area, she attended North Allegheny Intermediate High School before leaving there to be homeschooled to avoid bullying she experienced at school.


== Career ==


=== 1993–1998: Career beginnings ===
In 1991, Aguilera auditioned for a position on The All-New Mickey Mouse Club (MMC), aired on the Disney Channel. She ran against 400 candidates, and while she made the shortlist she was ultimately rejected for not meeting the minimum age requirement. One year later, in 1992, Aguilera received a call from one of the show's producers asking if she was still interested in becoming a "Mouseketeer". She once again competed for a spot (this time, against 15,000 candidates) and was selected to join the variety program the following year. Her fellow cast members included Ryan Gosling, Keri Russell, Britney Spears, and Justin Timberlake. During the show recordings—which included Aguilera performing musical numbers and comedy sketches—she moved with her family to Orlando, Florida. In 1994, it was reported the series would not return for a new season.Aiming to beginning a music career, Aguilera moved to Japan in 1997. She was selected to record a duet with Japanese singer Keizo Nakanishi, with whom she performed in concert shows around the country. Their song, "All I Wanna Do" was released as a promotional single but failed to reach commercial success. In June 1997, Aguilera went on to Romania to represent the United States in a singers contest during the Golden Stag Festival, but she failed to win over the audience. Seeking a recording contract, Aguilera recorded numerous demo tapes directed to record labels, including Walt Disney Records, for which she send a cover version of "Run to You" by Whitney Houston. She eventually was given the opportunity to record "Reflection", theme from animated film Mulan (1998), which charted on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart at number 15.


=== 1999–2001: Breakthrough with debut album ===
Following the attention received with "Reflection", Ron Fair—A&R executive from RCA Records—offered to Aguilera a deal with the label. In late 1998, she started recording her debut studio album into which producers had reportedly invested $1 million worth of writers, producers and voice lessons. Although Aguilera's desire to create material directly inspired by R&B, the label opted for a teen pop production due the genre's high financial return in the late 1990s. Her self-titled debut album, Christina Aguilera, was released in August 1999, and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200. It catapulted Aguilera into fame globally and sold over ten million copies in its first year of release. It was later certified eight times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and sold over 17 million copies worldwide."Genie in a Bottle" served as the album's lead single, and topped the Billboard Hot 100 for five consecutive weeks. It also rise Aguilera's popularity worldwide, leading charts in over 20 countries. The single attracted the attention of conservative people including celebrities such as Debbie Gibson that spoke out against its lyrical content, and was eventually considered "too provocative" to be sung by a teen idol. Due to the criticism, Radio Disney replaced the original version with a censored one. Other of the album's singles, "What a Girl Wants" and "Come On Over Baby (All I Want Is You)", also topped the Hot 100 chart, while "I Turn to You" reached number three there. At the 42nd Annual Grammy Awards, Aguilera won the Best New Artist category, which received wide media coverage. Time credited the award for "[helping] certify her credentials as a real singer". In mid 2000, she embarked on Christina Aguilera in Concert—which toured North America, Latin America, Europe, and Japan.

Aguilera's success continued to rise with the release of her second studio album, Mi Reflejo, in September 2000. It features Spanish-language songs and was produced as a Latin pop material. The album topped both the Billboard Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums for nineteen consecutive weeks and later was certified six times Latin platinum by the RIAA. Mi Reflejo also reached the platinum stats in Argentina, Mexico, and Spain. At the 2nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards, it won Best Female Pop Vocal Album. In October 2000, she also promoted a third record, My Kind of Christmas, and later starred in a holiday special, My Reflection, which aired on ABC. Aguilera's commercial success saw her being named the 2000 Top Female Pop Act by Billboard. The same year, she filed a fiduciary duty against manager Steve Kurtz for "improper, undue, and inappropriate influence over her professional activities". She eventually hired Irving Azoff to manage her career, aiming for a new artistic direction and control of her own image.In early 2001, Aguilera reached commercial success with collaboration singles. While "Nobody Wants to Be Lonely" with Ricky Martin peaked number thirteen on Hot 100, "Lady Marmalade" with Lil' Kim, Mýa, and Pink topped the chart for five consecutive weeks. The later, included on Moulin Rouge! soundtrack, earned her the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year, as well the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals, for which she was also nominated with "Nobody's Want to Be Lonely". In August 2001, Warlock Records released Just Be Free, a demo album recorded by Aguilera between 1994 and 1995 while she was looking for a recording deal following the end of The All-New Mickey Mouse Club (MMC). She filed a suit against the label and the album's producers aiming to stop the release of the album. Both parties came to a confidential settlement to release the album, in which Aguilera lent out her name, likeness, and image for an unspecified amount of damages.


=== 2002–2004: New image with Stripped ===
With a new management, Aguilera started moving away from her teen pop niche and began working on a new project. She cultivated a new image by adopting the alter ego Xtina, dyeing her hair black, and sporting several tattoos and body piercings. Her fourth studio album, Stripped, was released in October 2002. Containing numerous musical genres, including R&B, hip-hop, flamenco, and rock, it was described by her as "a new beginning, a re-introduction of [herself] as a new artist", for which she also contributed as executive producer and co-wrote most of the songs. The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, and eventually was certified five times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). In the UK, Stripped sold over two million copies and became the second highest-selling album by an American female artists in the 2000s. Since then, it was reported the album sold 12 million copies globally.

The album's lead single, "Dirrty", peaked number 48 on Billboard Hot 100. Its accompanying music video generated controversy for depicting overtly sexual fetishes, attracting the attention of conservative organizations and moralists sought to have the video banned on MTV. The music video sparked protests in Thailand and eventually was banned in the country's local television. Aguilera's new persona was widely criticized by media outlets and it began to overshadow her music, while Entertainment Weekly described her image as "the world's skeeziest reptile woman". In spite of the backlash, "Dirrty" topped the charts in Ireland and the UK. The second single, "Beautiful", reached number two on the Hot 100. It received widespread acclaim for its empowering lyrics about embracing inner beauty, and became a LGBT anthem. At the 46th Annual Grammy Awards, the single won Best Female Pop Vocal Performance.The following singles of Stripped—"Fighter" and "Can't Hold Us Down"—also reached top twenty on Hot 100, while "The Voice Within" peaked at number thirty three there. In Summer 2003, Aguilera co-headlined The Justified & Stripped Tour alongside Justin Timberlake, whose supported also his solo debut album, Justified (2002). The joint tour visited North America only, attracting an audience of 546,483 and grossing over $31.8 million. It ranked sixteenth on Billboard's list of Top 25 Tours of 2003. Later that year, she also embarked on The Stripped Tour which went to Europe, Asia, and Australia. In early 2004, it was expected she would return to North America to perform in a second leg of the tour. However, the dates were canceled last-minute due to a vocal cord injury. Her performances at the Wembley Arena were taped, broadcast on WB Network and eventually sold as a video album under the name Stripped Live in the U.K.Aguilera received widespread media coverage due to her televised music performances. At the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards, she joined Britney Spears to performing "Like a Virgin" and "Hollywood", where both ended up kissing Madonna. Various media outlets retrospectively considered it one of the "most iconic" VMAs performances of all time. During the 2003 MTV Europe Music Awards—which was hosted by herself—she made a live presentation of "Dirrty". Wearing a nun's habit, Aguilera was accompanied by a choir and eventually undressed to reveal her underclothes while performing the slutdrop dance style. Late that year, she was named 2003 Top Female Pop Act by Billboard. In 2004, she recorded "Car Wash" with Missy Elliott which was released as single from Shark Tale soundtrack, and contributed vocals to "Tilt Ya Head Back" with rapper Nelly.


=== 2005–2009: Back to Basics ===
In early 2005, Aguilera embraced a new image inspired by Old Hollywood figures, debuting burlesque-style curly blonde hair and makeup. Her new persona was eventually adopted to promote her subsequent music project. Described as a "throwback with elements of old-school [music] combined with a modern-day twist", Back to Basics, was released as a double album in August 2006. Lyrically inspired by Aguilera's husband, Jordan Bratman, it received generally positive reviews by critics due its retro-oriented production. AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine called it "catchy, exciting, and unique ... an album to build a career upon". It debuted at number one in numerous countries, including Australia, Canada, Germany, Switzerland, and the UK. In the U.S, it scored the top on the Billboard 200, becoming her second material to lead the chart. Back to Basics was later certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and sold over 5 million units worldwide.

"Ain't No Other Man" served as the album's lead single and was praised by music critics. The Morning Call opined that "it put [Aguilera] at Aretha Franklin's doorstep". The single peaked number six on Billboard Hot 100 and has sold 1.7 million digital copies in the U.S. Its accompanying video featured Aguilera under the alter ego Baby Jane—which was also adopted during the Back to Basics' promotion campaign. The single eventually earned her the Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. Other of the album's singles, "Hurt" and "Candyman", became top-ten hits on international charts, and peaked top-thirty on Hot 100. In 2006, Aguilera also contributed vocals to singles "Somos Novios (It's Impossible)" with Andrea Bocelli and "Tell Me" with rapper Diddy, which reached number eight in the UK.In November 2006, Aguilera embarked on the Back to Basics Tour—which visited North America, Europe, Asia, and Oceania—and ran until October 2008. Being divided in acts such as juke joint and circus, Rolling Stone highlighted its "numerous sets and costumes changes" emphasizing Aguilera's "evolution from bubblegum starlet to dirrty vixen to her current incarnation as retro-styled soul siren". With earnings around 48.1 million in 2007, it eventually became the highest-grossing concert tour by a female of the year. Aguilera's image and "overtly sexual themes" on tour demanded the concert show in Shanghai was submitted for prior approval by the Ministry of Culture of the People's Republic of China. Her performances at the Adelaide Entertainment Centre were taped, broadcast on VH1 and sold as a video album under the title Back to Basics: Live and Down Under.In 2008, Aguilera appeared in the Martin Scorsese documentary Shine a Light, chronicling a two-day concert by The Rolling Stones at the Beacon Theatre. Her cameo was on the stage performing "Live with Me" with the band's lead vocalist Mick Jagger. Keeps Gettin' Better: A Decade of Hits, Aguilera's first greatest hits compilation album, was released in November 2008. It also added two original songs, including its title track. The compilation reached number nine on Billboard 200 and was later certified gold by the RIAA. "Keeps Gettin' Better" eventually served as the compilation's lead single and debuted at number seven on the Hot 100, becoming her highest debut on the chart. By the end of the 2000s, she was named as the twentieth "Artist of the Decade" by Billboard, as well was nominated to the MTV Europe Music Award for Best Act Ever.


=== 2010–2011: Bionic, Burlesque, and The Voice ===

Aguilera stated that she began working in a new music material while pregnant in 2008. Her sixth studio album, Bionic, was released in June 2010. Directly inspired by electronic music, it was described by her as a project "about the future [...] my son in my life, motivating me to want to play and have fun". It received generally mixed reviews by critics which called it "very strong, but only in parts". The album peaked number three on the Billboard 200, and topped European and the UK charts. It was later certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and sold around 1 million copies globally. "Not Myself Tonight" served as the album's lead single and peaked number twenty three on Billboard Hot 100 and were followed with the singles "You Lost Me" and "Woohoo".Aguilera landed her first starring role as a waitress turned burlesque performer in the Steven Antin film Burlesque, released in theaters in November 2010. Despite the film's mixed reception, Aguilera's portrayal of the main character garnered positive reviews, and the film grossed US$90 million in the box office. The film received a nomination for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy at the 68th Golden Globe Awards. In addition to starring in the film, Aguilera recorded eight tracks for the film's ten-track accompanying soundtrack, while her co-star, Cher performed the remaining two. The soundtrack reached number 18 on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA.In early 2011, Aguilera omitted a few lines while performing "The Star-Spangled Banner" at Super Bowl XLV, which led to extensive media coverage. She apologized for the incident saying, "I got so caught up in the moment of the song that I lost my place [...] I can only hope that everyone could feel my love for this country and that the true spirit of its anthem still came through". In April 2011, Aguilera became a coach on reality competition show The Voice, which aired on NBC. Aguilera later returned to its second, third, fifth, eighth, and tenth season. In late 2011, she featured on the song "Moves like Jagger" by Maroon 5. The song topped the Hot 100 for four non-consecutive weeks, and was later certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).


=== 2012–2017: Lotus and other projects ===

During the third season of The Voice in September 2012, Aguilera released "Your Body" as the lead single from her then-upcoming seventh studio album, which reached number 34 on the Billboard Hot 100. The album, titled Lotus, followed in November 2012, in which Aguilera described the record as a "rebirth" of herself after the personal struggles she overcame. Contemporary reviewers found the album generic and conventional, as opposed to Aguilera's previous experimental ventures. Lotus peaked at number 7 on the Billboard 200 and has sold 303,000 copies in the US as of 2019.In 2013, Aguilera scored three international top-ten singles. She first featured on rapper Pitbull's "Feel This Moment", which peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified platinum by the RIAA. She subsequently appeared on Mexican singer Alejandro Fernández's cover of Miguel Gallardo's "Hoy Tengo Ganas de Ti" (1976), which earned a diamond certification in Mexico. Aguilera also collaborated with A Great Big World on the ballad "Say Something", which earned a six-time platinum certification from the RIAA and won Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards. On October 1, 2013, Aguilera also featured on the soundtrack for The Hunger Games: Catching Fire with the song "We Remain".On January 1, 2014, Aguilera featured on the remix for "Do What U Want" by Lady Gaga to replace the original version with R. Kelly after his sexual abuse allegations. In 2015, Aguilera starred in the third season of the musical drama series Nashville, which aired on ABC. She also contributed to the series' soundtrack with "The Real Thing" and "Shotgun" — with the later reaching number twenty-eight on Hot Country Songs chart.In May 2016, Aguilera also exited The Voice following its tenth season, which she won with her contestant Alisan Porter. A month later, Aguilera released the song "Change", in which she dedicated to the victims of the 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting. In August 2016, Aguilera also recorded a disco song titled "Telepathy" featuring Nile Rodgers for the soundtrack of Netflix original series The Get Down (2016). In July 2017, Aguilera voiced a video-game dancer in The Emoji Movie (2017).


=== 2018–2020: Liberation and residency ===

Aguilera released her eighth studio album Liberation on June 15, 2018, to favorable reviews. The album had been in the works since the summer of 2015 and incorporated R&B and hip-hop elements. Liberation debuted at number six on the Billboard 200 chart, becoming Aguilera's seventh US top-ten album. The album was promoted with multiple singles, including the lead single, "Accelerate" featuring Ty Dolla Sign and 2 Chainz, which became Aguilera's tenth number one song on the US Billboard Dance Songs Chart. Two other singles from the album, "Fall in Line" (with Demi Lovato) and "Like I Do" were nominated at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance and Best Rap/Sung Performance respectively. Aguilera also starred in the romantic science fiction Zoe, which premiered at the Tribeca Film festival in April 2018, and was released in July of that year.To further promote Liberation, Aguilera embarked on her first tour in 10 years, The Liberation Tour, which ran from September to November 2018. This tour was followed by The X Tour, which ran in Europe and Mexico from July to December 2019. She also headlined Christina Aguilera: The Xperience, a 25-date concert residency at the Zappos Theater at Planet Hollywood Las Vegas, beginning in May and concluding in March 2020.In October 2019, Aguilera released the song "Haunted Heart" from the soundtrack of the computer-animated Addams Family film, and her second collaboration with A Great Big World, "Fall on Me", followed a month later. In early 2020, Aguilera recorded two songs for Disney's live action remake of Mulan (2020): "Loyal Brave True" – released in March 2020 as a promotional single to positive reviews, eventually being shortlisted as one of the fifteen potential nominees for the Academy Award for Best Original Song  – and a re-recording of "Reflection", released in August. In November of that year, Aguilera signed a new management deal with Roc Nation.


=== 2021–present: Aguilera ===

In July 2021, Aguilera performed two sold-out shows at the Hollywood Bowl with Gustavo Dudamel and the Los Angeles Philharmonic. She also recorded "The Addams Family Theme", which was featured on The Addams Family 2 soundtrack. In October, she performed "Reflection", "When You Wish Upon a Star" and "Loyal Brave True" in ABC's Walt Disney World's 50th Anniversary special. On December 7, 2021, Aguilera was honoured with the People's Music Icon honorific award at the 47th People's Choice Awards.Aguilera released her ninth studio album, titled Aguilera, originally as a double album on May 31, 2022. The  album paid tribute to different genres of Latin music, and consisted of three separately released parts: La Fuerza, La Tormenta, and La Luz. The full album was released in its complete form on September 30, 2022. Aguilera received widespread critical acclaim from music critics upon release, and was placed on several year-end lists by publications such as Billboard and the Houston Chronicle. The album received seven nominations at the 23rd Annual Latin Grammy Awards with Aguilera winning for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album. The album also received another two nominations for Best Latin Pop Album and Best Immersive Audio Album at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards. The album was promoted through the EU / UK Summer Series promotional tour, which consisted of five festival shows throughout Europe and three arena concerts in the United Kingdom. The promotional tour received critical praise.On June 11, 2022, Aguilera headlined the Los Angeles Pride festival with guests Mýa, Kim Petras and Paris Hilton. The use of a strap-on dildo during the set was the subject of polarized reception. In October 2022, Stripped was reissued for its 20-year anniversary, featuring "I Will Be" (the b-side to "Dirrty") and Benny Benassi's remix of "Beautiful". A new music video for "Beautiful" was also released. On November 10, 2022, Time Studios announced a partnership with Roc Nation to produce an upcoming documentary about Aguilera.


== Artistry ==


=== Influences ===

Aguilera has named Etta James as a "role model", and said "At Last" made a major impression on her. She later stated, "I'll still be as raunchy as I wanna be, and I'll have [Etta]'s memory to back me up. She's what I want to be someday". As a young girl, The Sound of Music (1959) and its lead actress, Julie Andrews, became her early references to sing and perform, in addition to broadening her interest on Broadway. Other Aguilera's major influences include Whitney Houston, Mariah Carey, Billie Holiday, and Ella Fitzgerald. She has also cited rock bands as an influence, specifically the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Nirvana, and Radiohead.Aguilera was also influenced by Latin music. She later recalled singing her first songs in Spanish during childhood, saying: "I grew up hearing [Spanish] being spoken in my household [and] hearing a lot of Julio Iglesias on the record player". Some of her other inspirations in Latin music include Chavela Vargas, Vicente Fernández, and younger artists such Rosalía. As a performer, Aguilera credits Madonna and Janet Jackson as major inspirations for being "positive female artists [who] aren't afraid to take chances, be daring, experimental and sexy". Cher also encouraged her to being a performer and "a woman who has the guts to do [everything]".Aguilera's childhood visits to records stores moulded her taste and led to an appreciation for blues and soul music, which she called "music that really had heart". Aguilera has also paid hommage to many artists from this genre in her music, including Aretha Franklin, Marvin Gaye, Nina Simone, and Otis Redding. Her album Back to Basics (2006) features inspirations of musicians from the early 20th century. As she later commented: "I was just so drawn to that [kind of music] ... [It] has so much pain, so much beauty of raw emotion and passion". Her other influences in the genre was added for Liberation (2018), including Michael Jackson in "Maria" and Janis Joplin in "Sick of Sittin'".Outside of the music industry, Aguilera was inspired by actresses from the Old Hollywood. She later stated, "I'm fascinated with the golden age of film. I wanted to capture the authenticity of the glam era", after which she cited examples such as Marlene Dietrich, Marilyn Monroe, Greta Garbo, Veronica Lake, and the pin-up models. Her "Tilt Ya Head Back" music video also recreated Monroe's signature look, while the video for "Your Body" includes a directly reference to Lucille Ball. The video for "Ain't No Other Man" presented Aguilera under the alter ego Baby Jane, which was inspired by Bette Davis's character in psychological horror film What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962). Her other inspirations mostly came from contemporary art, including works by Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein and Banksy.


=== Voice ===

Critics have described Aguilera as a soprano, possessing a four-octave vocal range (from C3 to C♯7). She is also able to perform the whistle register. Maura Johnston, a journalist withSlate, called Aguilera's voice "an instrument that despite its ability to leap octaves has a low-end grounding similar to that possessed by opera singers". The Boston Globe columnist Joan Anderman praised her vocal versatility, stating, "[She] is a real singer ... blessed with the sort of breathtaking elasticity, golden tones, and sheer power that separate the divas from the dabblers". In addition to sustain high notes, Aguilera is recognized for making use of the melismatic technique. Jon Pareles from The New York Times emphasized that "she can aim a note as directly as aa missile or turn its trajectory into an aerobatic spiral of leaping, quivering, and scalloping melismas". RCA Records music executive Ron Fair praised her "perfect intonation", and opined she has "pipes to be the next Barbra Streisand or Céline Dion".Several critics have compared Aguilera's technique to that of other singers. Journalist David Browne suggested that, alongside Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston, she "forms the team of the main proponents" of the melismatic technique. Richard Harrington from The Washington Post also compared her to these artists, but suggested she sounds even better: "she has a genuinely powerful voice," he writes, "that's evoked comparisons [to] Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston, though it for the most part avoids those singers' ornamental mannerisms". Sasha Frere-Jones, columnist of The New Yorker, also credited the technique by making her become "a serious singer without needing to reincarnate the Sarah Vaughan", while songwriter Steve Kipner praised her vocal dexterity, including her ability to "internalize[d] all the riffs from Chaka Khan". Los Angeles Times music critic Ann Powers wrote that Aguilera possesses a "voice purely powerful as that of Etta James [...] and she's moving toward the expressiveness of Gladys Knight, if not Aretha Franklin". Powers also associated her vocal ability with Donna Summer when she performs records influenced by rhythm and blues.Aguilera, however, has also been criticized for the excessive use of melisma, as well for oversinging during her concerts shows. The Huffington Post columnist John Eskow called her as "the main proponent of oversouling". Eskow recognizes Aguilera's voice as a "great instrument", although she "[doesn't] seem to know when to stop" with the use of "gratuitous and confected melisma". Lucy Davies, music critic from BBC Music, raved about her "stunning voice", but offered that "she could be more varied, simply by cutting out some of the 'ye-e-eeeh, woah' in her songs". Writing for Entertainment Weekly, Chris Willman credits Aguilera's tendency to oversinging as an influence of Mariah Carey, noting "her slightly nasal tone that really only becomes obvious when she's overselling a song". Alexa Tietjen from VH1 acknowledged that Aguilera "does tend to take it to the extreme at times [...] but her vocal prowess is what's gotten her so far. Love them or hate them, the riffs are a part of who she is as performer".


=== Musical style ===
Generally referred to as a pop artist, Aguilera has gone on to experiment with different musical genres throughout her career. She explains that she always tries to bring something new to her projects, "experiment[ing] with [her] voice" in addition to verbalizing her preference of working with more "obscure" collaborators, and that she is not necessarily inclined to contact "the number-one chart-toppers in music" just because they are in popular demand. Reviewing her artistically, Alexis Petridis, columnist from The Guardian, recognized that her "boldness in reinventing herself" was always "one of her most impressive facets," while Kelefa Sanneh from The New York Times highlighted her "decision to snub some of the big-name producers on whom pop stars often rely".Aguilera's first two records, Christina Aguilera (1999) and Mi Reflejo (2000), were produced with an influsion of teen pop and dance-pop, with the latter also referencing her incentive through Latin music. She showed artistic growth with Stripped (2002) which was described as "substantive and mature [...] with pleasantly surprising depth," where she showed a range of genres, including R&B, hip hop, rock, and soul, and moved away from the teen niche. On her fifth studio album, Back to Basics (2006), Aguilera worked with several producers to create a "throwback with elements of old-school genres combined with a modern-day twist [and] hard-hitting beats". Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic called the project an "artistic statement [...] a little crass and self-centered, but also catchy, exciting and unique".In 2010, Aguilera developed the soundtrack for Burlesque, whose content was influenced by Cabaret (1972) and highlighted several songs that were redone as dance numbers in a fashion similar to Moulin Rouge! (2001). In the same year, Bionic saw Aguilera working with producers specialized in electronic music to create a future-pop project with elements taken from electro. Sam Lanksy from MTV Buzzworthy described it as "forward-thinking and even timeless," and praised its "subversive [and] ambient production". Aguilera explored and heavily incorporated electro-pop on Lotus (2012). Conversely, in 2018 she contributed with Kanye West and Anderson .Paak on Liberation, creating an album inspired by R&B and hip-hop styles which she had included in her previous material. Aguilera had noted that, "There's nothing like an amazing hip-hop beat. At the end of the day, I am a soul singer [...] singing soulfully is where my core, my root and my heart really is".


=== Lyrical themes ===
Regarding the lyrical themes in her music, Aguilera stated that she feels a "sense of responsibility" to reference her personal life so that "people that can relate might not feel as alone in the circumstance". While the bulk of her songs are rooted in light-hearted themes like love, motherhood, marriage, and fidelity, she does not evade serious and controversial subjects such as domestic violence, abusive relationships, female empowerment, and sexuality in her discography.According to Pier Dominguez, Aguilera's personality was likely impacted by the domestic violence she witnessed during her childhood, but unlike some other children who witness violence at home, she did not act out but created an "internal defense mechanism". Chloé Govan qualifies this claim, saying that Aguilera's experience with bullying at school made her an introverted and insecure person. Aguilera's mother played a crucial role in building her self-confidence, and taught her a "message about self-respect". Both authors agree that this message had a strong impact on Aguilera's behavior in the transition to adulthood and also found expression in some of her early number-one singles, "Genie in a Bottle" and "What a Girl Wants" (both from 1999), the lyrics of which can refer to female empowerment.Sex is a recurring subject throughout Aguilera's lyrics, and this has occasionally stirred up controversy. Aguilera herself tends to emphasize that her goal is not necessarily to provoke, but simply to express herself. In an interview with People, she stated, "If I want to be sexual, it's for my own appreciation and enjoyment. That's why I like to talk about the fact that sometimes I am attracted to women. I appreciate their femininity and beauty". Recognized for the use of feminism in her music, Aguilera denounced the double standard for the first time in "Can't Hold Us Down" (2002), explaining that men are applauded for their sexual behaviors, while women who behave in a similar fashion are disdained. Writing for The Guardian, Hermione Hoby noted that she "incites a sisterly spirit of collaboration [and] not shy of the odd feministic declaration herself".


== Cultural status ==


=== Public image ===

Publications have called Aguilera a pop icon, a triple threat entertainer, and a diva. Her vocal abilities distinguished her from her peers, and she has been referred to as the "Voice of a Generation". Her fan-base is named the "Fighters" drawing inspiration from her 2003 single "Fighter". She is one of the most popular musicians on Twitter with approximately 17 million followers, and was one of the most searched artists in the world in 2002, 2004, and 2010 through Google. She was also one of the most popular searches in 2003 by Yahoo! Search.Aguilera is also recognized as a gay icon; in 2019, she was awarded by the Human Rights Campaign for using her "platform to share a message of hope and inspiration to those who have been marginalized [...] bringing greater visibility to the LGBTQ community". Her 2002 song "Beautiful" has been called an anthem for the LGBT community, with UK LGBT rights charity Stonewall naming it the most empowering song of the decade for lesbian, gay and bisexual people and for having "inspired millions of young people around the world". In 2023, Aguilera was honored for her LGBTQ allyship and for advocating for the queer community at the Stonewall National Monument.Aguilera's style and fashion has attracted significant media attention throughout her career, and she has been named a fashion icon. Jon Caramanica, journalist from The New York Times, concluded that "Aguilera will be remembered for her glamour and her scandalous take on femme-pop", while Janelle Okwodu from Vogue noted that she "has never been afraid to take a fashion risk [and] has filled her videos with jaw-dropping styles and risqué runway looks". Following her appearance at New York Fashion Week in 2018, Dazed named her one of the most stylish people of the year. Aguilera's influence on fashion has been noted by several publications. Samantha Sutton of InStyle noted Aguilera's influence on the rising fashion trends of 2021. Writing for Vogue in 2022, Christian Allaire said that Aguilera was "ahead of her time" when it came to her 2002 image.Since the beginning of her career, Aguilera has attracted criticism for her revealing clothes, and has been called a sex symbol. In an interview with MTV News, Debbie Gibson accused her of "influencing girls out there wearing less and less", considering that "she lives and breathes the sexual image". In response to negative comments, Aguilera stated: "Just because I have a certain image, everyone wants me to be this role model. But nobody is perfect, and nobody can live up to that". VH1, included in the list of the sexiest entertainment artists in 2002 and 2013; in publications from FHM and Complex, she received similar honors in 2004 and 2012, respectively. In 2003, she was chosen as the sexiest woman of the year by Maxim, stamping the cover of the best-selling issue of the magazine's history, and she was named one of the most beautiful people in the world in 2003 and 2007 by People.Aguilera was on the original panel of coaches from the reality competition show The Voice. More generally, she has been recognized for her contributions to American television and music competitions. The New York Times, for example, noted that "She should also be remembered as the person who almost single-handedly reshaped music competition reality programming" while journalist Jon Caramanica pointed out that this was done at a time where numerous pop stars were becoming coaches and judges from American Idol and The X Factor. As a coach on The Voice, Aguilera was listed among the highest-paid American television stars, receiving $225,000 per episode in 2011, $10 million per season in 2012, $12 million in 2013, $12.5 million in 2014, and $17 million in 2016.


=== Reinventions and personas ===

Aguilera is noted for having reinvented her public image numerous times during her career. Stereogum writer Tom Breihan noted that she "thought of herself primarily as a [...] young Mariah Carey-type", but was instead marketed as a bubblegum pop teen idol due to the genre's popularity in the late 1990s, following the success of Britney Spears's debut album. David Browne of Entertainment Weekly noted that Aguilera was "a good girl pretending to be bad" when compared to Spears' music and image. In contrast, Christopher J. Farley of Time considered her a more impressive artist than Spears. Megan Turner from New York Post compared the "battle" between both artists in the media with the previous one between the Beatles and the Rolling Stones; however, she differentiated between Spears and Aguilera primary on the basis of image, suggesting that "while Britney has a va-va-voom sexuality [...] Aguilera had charm and a youthful appeal".Aguilera departed from the teen idol image with the release of Stripped in 2002, by dyeing her hair black, getting body piercings, and posing nude for several publications. This was attributed to her provocative and extravagant alter ego named Xtina. Serving as the host of the 2003 MTV Europe Music Awards, Aguilera opened the show dressed as a nun, accompanied by a choir singing the lead single from Stripped, "Dirrty", before showing off a more revealing outfit. While analyzing her new visual, Vice and Rolling Stone magazines wrote that her new clothes echoed as if she were participating in the Girls Gone Wild franchise. In a review of her persona, author Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic opined that Aguilera reached "maturity with transparent sexuality and pounding sounds of nightclubs". Writing for The Daily Telegraph, Adam White was more positive about her image and recognized that her "embracing of an overtly sexual image in the wake of adolescent stardom was a tried and tested route to adult success".For the release of Back to Basics in 2006, Aguilera adopted a new persona named Baby Jane, named after Bette Davis's character in What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962). The image drew inspiration from actresses of the Golden Age of Hollywood, such as Marilyn Monroe, to go with the album's 1920s–1950s musical direction. Starting in 2008, she adopted a futuristic image, which drew comparisons to the image of then-newcomer, Lady Gaga. In 2012, she drew criticism over her weight gain from several publications; the following year, she received favorable media attention after a significant weight loss. In March 2018, Aguilera appeared on the cover of the spring 2018 issue of Paper, titled "Transformation". Photographed by Zoey Grossman, the images featured Aguilera with minimal makeup and no photographic manipulation, debuting her freckles. Her appearance in the pictures received significant media attention and widespread praise. This led to other celebrities who had posed similarly receiving attention. Starting in 2021, Aguilera began showing off a red-haired look for the promotion of her ninth studio album, Aguilera (2022).


=== Legacy ===
Various music journalists and authors have noted Aguilera's legacy in the entertainment industry and deemed her as one of the greatest artists in pop music. In 2004, she was listed as one of the most influential people in the music market according to The Independent, and was cited as the eight greatest woman in the phonographic industry by VH1. Early in her career, Aguilera was labeled as a teen idol, and has been cited as one of the artists who revived teen pop in the late nineties; Time magazine stated that she was a "pioneer [in] a different type of teen stardom", crediting her vocal ability as responsible for the phenomenon. Since then, she has been named as one of the greatest singers in contemporary pop music; by MTV, she was cited as one of the best voices in music since eighties, while Rolling Stone and Consequence of Sound included her in their lists of greatest singers of all time. In 2013, Latina honored her as the best vocalist of Latin origin in history. With the recognition of her vocal ability and influence in the music industry, she has been referred in media with the titles of "Princess of Pop" and "Voice of a Generation".

Upon launching her music career in the late nineties, Aguilera was cited as one of the artists who shaped the "Latin explosion", having contributed to the Latin pop boom in American music in early of the century. Considered one of the greatest artists of the 2000s, she has been classified between the main references of the Millennials; writing for Vice magazine, Wanna Thompson analyzed her impact in the turn of the century, stating that alongside Britney Spears, "Aguilera dominated mainstream pop-related discussions. [Her] perfectly packaged music and looks appealed to tweens and teens who wanted to be like the pretty, chart-topping pop stars plastered everywhere". The commercial success of her first projects as a bubblegum pop singer caused an effect that influenced record labels to invest in new artists who attracted the same youthful appeal, catapulting names like Jessica Simpson and Mandy Moore.Critics also highlighted the impact of her work in popular culture; while Stripped (2002) was cited as "the blueprint for divas making the transition from teen idol to adult pop star", Aguilera is credited for "paving the way for a generation of pop singers". Jeff Benjamin from Billboard stated that the album explored a "process of self-identification and declaration still influencing today's mainstream scene", in addition to "how of today's biggest pop stars have followed a similar path, exploring and incorporating these strategies into their careers". In 2007, her self-titled debut album was added to the definitive list from Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, being recognized as one of the "history's most influential and popular albums". Since then, Aguilera and her work have influenced various recording artists including Ariana Grande, Ava Max, Becky G, Britney Spears, Camila Cabello, Charli XCX, Demi Lovato, Doja Cat, Dua Lipa, Grimes, Halsey, Hayley Williams, Iggy Azalea, Karol G, Kelly Clarkson, Lady Gaga, Lauren Jauregui, Meghan Trainor, Miley Cyrus, Nicki Nicole, Olivia Rodrigo, Rina Sawayama, Rosalía, Sabrina Carpenter, Sam Smith, Selena Gomez, K. Michelle, and Tinashe, and athletes such as figure skater Johnny Weir, ice dancers Zachary Donohue and Madison Hubbell, and swimmer Dana Vollmer.Aguilera has also been praised for emphasizing the importance of feminism in pop music; several journalists agree that her use of sexual imagery has helped catalyze public discourse on the topic. Lamar Dawson, columnist from The Huffington Post, praised her feminist efforts in the music industry and recognized that "while Christina isn't the first pop star to place feminist rhetoric into pop culture, she led the charge at the beginning of the 21st century of influencing the next generation of impressionable teens who were too young for Janet [Jackson] and Madonna's curriculum". Gerrick D. Kennedy from Los Angeles Times shared the same point of view and stated that "for a generation who hit puberty during the great 2000 pop explosion, Aguilera was an essential voice with music that tackled self-empowerment, feminism, sex and domestic violence — subject matter her contemporaries were shying away from". Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett, co-founder of The Vagenda, opined that the provocative dance routines in Aguilera's music videos were "empowering", as she has been referred to as the forerunner of the slutdrop dance style.Aguilera's videography impact was also analysed by music critics. While "Dirrty" (2002) has been described as "one of the most controversial videos in pop music history", and one of the greatest music videos of all time, Issy Beech from i-D recognized that the audiovisual work "paved a path for videos like "Anaconda" and "Wrecking Ball" [...] paved the way for open sexuality from women in pop". In the video for "Beautiful" (2002), the highlight scene of a gay kiss has been considered one of the most important moments for LGBT culture, in addition to start Aguilera's image as a gay icon. Both works was elected as one of the greatest music videos of the 21st century by editors from Billboard, while she was named one of the greatest women of the video era according to VH1. In 2012, her videographic collection and some looks used throughout her career were part of an exhibition by the National Museum of Women in the Arts aimed at illustrating "the essential roles women have played in moving rock and roll and American culture forward".


== Achievements ==

Aguilera has accumulated numerous awards and honorary accolades throughout her career. At the age of 19, she won the Grammy Award for Best New Artist, becoming one of the youngest artists to earn such an honor. Aguilera received other four trophies from twenty nominations by The Recording Academy. She is also a recipient of two Latin Grammy Award, three Billboard Latin Music Awards—including the Spirit of Hope Award—, two MTV Video Music Awards (VMAs), two People's Choice Awards—including the inaugural Music Icon Award—, three World Music Awards, and one Guinness World Record. Among other of her honors, Aguilera received a star on Hollywood Walk of Fame in "recognition of her achievements in the recording industry" and was immortalized as a Disney Legend due "her remarkable contributions to the Walt Disney Company". Referred to as one of the most proeminent Latin artists in the entertainment industry, she was also elected as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time in 2013.With estimated sales around 100 million records, Aguilera is recognized as one of the world's best-selling music artists. In the United States, she has sold 41.9 million albums and singles until 2014, according to Nielsen SoundScan. As of 2022, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) certified over 54.2 million records, of which 17.5 million units came from her albums. While Christina Aguilera (1999) is certified eight times platinum, it was listed as one of the best-selling in the country. In 2013, Aguilera's sales reached 9.4 million records in the United Kingdom, according to the Official Charts Company. Stripped (2002) was also recognized as one of the few to surpass 2 million copies sold, becoming one of the best-selling albums of the 21st century in the country. Her collaboration with Maroon 5, "Moves Like Jagger", also was ranked among the best-selling singles in Australia, Canada, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States, as well one of the best-selling digital singles with over 14.4 million units.Elected as top female artist in 2000 and 2003, Aguilera was classified as the twentieth most prosperous artists of the 2000s, according Billboard. She was also listed as one of the most successful singers of the decade on Billboard 200, Hot 100, and Mainstream Top 40 charts—whose she also was ranked among the greatest of all time. With a total of 10 Dance Club Songs chart-toppers, Aguilera became the thirty-fifth most successful artist in the chart history. In addition to being recognized as the second best-selling singles solo artist on Billboard charts, she is one of the few female artists to lead the Hot 100 chart in three consecutive decades. Mi Reflejo (2000) also remains as one of the longest albums to chart at number one on Top Latin Albums. Aguilera had earned over US$113.8 million from tickets sales of her concert tours throughout her career. In 2020, she was classified among the top female artists of the 21st century in the concert industry, having sold more than 1.8 million tickets for her performances, according Pollstar. Her largest audience concert was held during Mawazine Festival, in Morocco, attracting 250,000 people which eventually became the record in the event's history.


== Other activities ==


=== Business ventures ===

Outside of her projects in the music industry, Aguilera has developed, endorsed, and invested in numerous brands, including Sears, Levi's (both in 2000), Skechers (2003), Mercedes-Benz, Virgin Mobile (both in 2004), Pepsi, Orange UK, Sony Ericsson (both in 2006), Oreo (2017), SweeTarts (2021), and Xeomin (2023). In 2001, she signed with Coca-Cola to star in a series of television commercials in a deal reported to worth up £50 million. Furthermore, Aguilera inspired a clothing line by Versace in 2003, starring as a model in its advertising campaign; likewise, in 2008, she influenced and appeared in a campaign to promote a collection of sterling silver pieces designed by Stephen Webster. In 2004, it was reported that she earned over £200,000 pounds to open a summer sale at London's department store Harrods. Following the birth of her son, Max, in 2008, Aguilera was paid $1.5 million to submit her baby pictures to People magazine, which became the ninth most expensive celebrity baby photograph ever taken. In 2016, it was reported that Aguilera was an investor of multiple companies, including Pinterest, DraftKings, Lyft and MasterClass — for which she also developed two singing classes, "Christina Aguilera Teaches Singing" (2016), and "Elevate Your Singing and Stage Presence" (2022).Outside of endorsements, Aguilera has also produced and developed her own products. In 2007, she introduced her perfume brand, Christina Aguilera Fragrances, which operated under Procter & Gamble (P&G), which is maintained with annual releases since then; in addition to being awarded numerous times at the FiFi Awards by The Fragrance Foundation, her fragrances ranked among the United Kingdom's best-sellers in 2007 and 2009. The brand was acquired by Elizabeth Arden, Inc., where it was estimated that the brand had $80 million in sales and $10 million in earnings in January 2016. In 2011, she unveiled her first clothing line at São Paulo Fashion Week, which was commercialized at the Brazilian department store C&A. In 2016, Aguilera and her fiancé, Matthew Rutler, founded their own production company, MX Productions, developing with Lionsgate the music competition program Tracks (2016), which aired on Spike TV. In 2023, Aguilera was announced as the co-founder and chief brand advisor of sexual wellness brand, Playground.


=== Philanthropy and activism ===

Referred to as a humanitarian, Aguilera has done philanthropic works during her career. In 2003, she visited the Women's Center & Shelter of Greater Pittsburgh and provided a donation over $200,000 in support for victims of domestic violence. In addition to starred in television advertsings on the Lifetime network calling for the end of violence against women in 2007, she partnered with Verizon in a campaign to awareness about violence domestic in 2015. She later destined proceeds from the Christina Aguilera: The Xperience (2019–2020) residency to The Shade Tree, a women and children's center in Las Vegas, Nevada. In October 2019, Aguilera efforts against domestic violence earned her the Bonnie Polley Community Hero Award.In 2009, Aguilera became the global spokesperson for the World Food Program, a branch of the United Nations (UN). She visited countries with high rates of malnutrions, including Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti and Rwanda. As of 2013, it was reported she helped raise over $148 million to the organization and other hunger relief agencies in 45 countries. Aguilera's efforts eventually earned her the Muhammad Ali Humanitarian Awards and George McGovern Leadership Awards—which she received in the White House from the former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton. Her other philanthropy initiatives included donations of her wedding gifts to charities in support of families affected by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and concerts to urges donations to the American Red Cross due Hurricane Sandy in 2012.In 2010, Aguilera auctioned tickets to her concerts through Christie's, earmaking the proceeds to non-profit environmental organizations, including Conservation International and the Natural Resources Defense Council. In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, she auctioned off a Chrysler 300 and destined proceeds to support disaster victims and their families. Additionally, Aguilera appeared on the Hope for Haiti Now telethon, whose donations directly benefited Oxfam America, Partners In Health, International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, and UNICEF. She also was praised by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) for signed an open letter destined to Government of South Korea appealing to the ban of consumption of dogs and cats, and for using fake fox fur in concerts costumes.As a LGBT rights activist, Aguilera was lauded for called out myths around HIV/AIDS, in addition to awares about the virus and raising funds for the Mac AIDS Fund and the Elton John AIDS Foundation. In 2008, she advocated for same-sex marriage and spoke out against Proposition 8. During an interview with MTV News, she stated "Why would you put so much money behind something [aimed at] stopping people from loving each other? I just don't understand it". In June 2016, Aguilera release single "Change", which was aimed to raise proceeds to the victim's families and survivors of the Orlando nightclub shooting. During The X Tour (2019), Aguilera visited Russia and "blessed" a gay marriage proposal in the backstage, contraring the country's laws against "gay propaganda".


== Personal life ==
Aguilera was raised Roman Catholic, although she was learning about Judaism in the mid 2000s. In 2022, she opened up about depression and anxiety, stating "I experienced a lot of trauma in my childhood [...] I've definitely had struggles in the past with depression and anxiety. It's a constant battle to overcome a mind that is anxious, a mind that is always second-guessing". Aguilera has also been sharing about insecurity and struggling with body image early in her career.Aguilera met dancer Jorge Santos backstage, while filming one of her music videos in 2000 and dated him until 2001. She began dating music executive Jordan Bratman in late 2002. Their engagement was announced in February 2005. On November 18, 2005, they married in a private ceremony on an estate in Napa County, California, during a traditional Jewish ceremony. Aguilera wore a flamenco-style wedding dress by Christian Lacroix and they exchanged wedding bands designed by jeweller Stephen Webster. She gave birth to their son, Max, on January 12, 2008. In September 2010, it was reported the couple had separated. She filed for divorce on October 14, 2010, which was finalized in February 2011, and included joint custody of their son.In November 2010, Aguilera began dating production assistant Matthew Rutler, whom she met while filming musical Burlesque. Aguilera was arrested for public intoxication in March 2011, while Rutler was booked for driving under the influence (DIU). However, the charges were dropped against Rutler the following month. In 2014, they became engaged on Valentine's Day. Later that year, Aguilera gave birth to their daughter, Summer Rain, on August 16.In 2007, Aguilera purchased a Mediterranean-style mansion in Beverly Hills for $11.5 million, which she sold for 13.5 million in March 2013. Shortly afterwards, she acquired a house in the Mulholland Estates' private enclave, at the Santa Monica Mountains, for $10 million and currently resides with her family. In January 2008, she was ranked 19th on Forbes' list of Top-Earning Women in Music of 2007 with earnings of $20 million. The previous year, she was also included on their list of richest women in entertainment industry, with an estimated net worth of $60 million. In August 2022, Aguilera's net worth was reported to be $160 million.


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Christina Aguilera (1999)
Mi Reflejo (2000)
My Kind of Christmas (2000)
Stripped (2002)
Back to Basics (2006)
Bionic (2010)
Lotus (2012)
Liberation (2018)
Aguilera (2022)


== Filmography ==

Burlesque (2010)
The Emoji Movie (2017)
Zoe (2018)


== Tours and residencies ==


== See also ==

Honorific nicknames in popular music
List of best-selling music artists
List of best-selling female music artists
List of artists who reached number one in the United States
List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart
List of highest paid American television stars


== References ==


=== Sources ===
Dominguez, Pier (2003). Christina Aguilera: A Star is Made: The Unauthorized Biography. Amber Communications Group, Inc. ISBN 978-0-970-222-459.
Donovan, Mary Anne (2010). Christina Aguilera: A Biography. ABC-Clio. ISBN 978-0-313-38319-9.
Govan, Chlóe (2013). Christina Aguilera: Unbreakable. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-857-129-949.
Greenberger, Robert (2008). Contemporary Musicians and Their Music: Christina Aguilera. Rosen Publishing. ISBN 978-1-435-848-641.
R. Mead, Margaret (2012). Christina Aguilera. Chelsea House. ISBN 978-1-438-14118-3.
Worth, Richard (2015). Christina Aguilera: Pop Singer. Enslow Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7660-7180-3.
Davis, Clive (2013). The Soundtrack of My Life. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-476-71479-0.
Kimpel, Dan (2006). How They Made It: True Stories of How Music's Biggest Stars Went from Start to Stardom. Hal Leonard LLC. ISBN 978-0-634-076-428.
Railton, Diane; Watson, Paul (2011). Music Video and the Politics of Representation. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-748-633-234.
Valdivia, Angharad N. (2010). Latino/as in the Media. Polity. ISBN 978-0-745-640-075.
Folkard, Claire (2005). Guinness World Records 2005. Jim Pattison Group. ISBN 1-892051-22-2.


=== Further reading ===
Scott, Kieran (2001). I Was a Mousketeer!. Disney Press. ISBN 978-0-7868-4470-8.


== External links ==

Official website
Christina Aguilera at AllMusic
Christina Aguilera discography at Discogs
Christina Aguilera at IMDb